from the Department of IBTE at Texas A&M
University.
Today is October the 16th, and I am visiting with
Dr. Don Clark, who has been at Texas A&M since 1967,
has served as Professor of Industrial Vocational
Technical Education, as well as Associate Dean
for Research, and he will be sharing some insights
and thoughts about the College of Education as he
has perceived it since he has been here in 1967
before it was even a College of Education
formally. And Dr. Clark, I would like to maybe just
start with change because that's been the big
thing since, well always, but in the College of
Education I know you have experienced tremendous
amounts of change and probably what I would like
for you to share is maybe what kind of impact these
changes have had, whether they be political or
sociological, on the growth and the development
of the College of Education. Well, maybe a place to
start would be to talk about my arrival at Texas A&M
University in 1967 and then evolve up a little bit
through and then interrupt along the way. When I
came to Texas A&M University in 1967, we did not
have a College of Education. Frank Hubert was then
the Dean of the College of Liberal Arts, and Fred
Benson was the Dean of the College of Engineering.
And my appointment was in the College of
Engineering, where the Department of Industrial
Education resided. Within that department, we
had the program called Industrial Education. a
large percentage, 96% or more of the
undergraduate students were in the industrial
technology and industrial distribution
programs. So therefore, the emphasis was not on
teacher education, but was rather on the
technology program. In the September of 1969 is
when the College of Education became formalized
as an administrative unit. And what we really did
was pull together the teacher education programs
from the three separate departments that existed
at that time that had teacher education and
created the College of Education. What we really
had was, prior to 69, we had teacher education in
the College of Engineering through industrial
education, in the College of Agriculture in the
Department of Agriculture Education. the
Department of Education, which was in the College
of Liberal Arts, along with the Department of
Health and Physical Education, which was in the
College of Liberal Arts. So we really had teacher
education residing in four departments in three
separate colleges. So it was under the leadership
of Frank Hubert, who had great administrative
insights, which we might want to discuss further,
that pulled together the administrative unit of
the College of Education and pulled all teacher
education elements then under one
administrative umbrella with agriculture
education answering in a joint relationship to
the College of Agriculture and the College of
Education, which they still exist. So in 1969,
when we created this College of Education, There
were those of us who were involved in the teacher
education function in the old Department of
Industrial Education came to the College of
Education with James Boone coming in as the head of
the Department of Industrial Education at that
time, Les Hawkins, who has since retired, and
myself. There were as well as the faculty members
who came to create the Department of Industrial
Education within the College of Education. We
brought with us the undergraduate teacher
education program as well as the entire master's
and doctoral level programs that were in
existence. The doctor of education, which we had
in the best education, was the first doctorate in
the field of education that was on this campus. It
preceded the development of the PhD in education
by a number of years. I don't have the specifics,
but it was in place prior to the The first
doctorate, can you repeat that? The first
doctorate was in industrial? In industrial
education. And that program preceded the one in
the Department of Education. That's the one that
Dr. Barker was instrumental in putting together.
The education one. The education doctorate.
Well, the one in the Department of Education. Now,
the one in the Department of Industrial
Education, that was in the College of
Engineering. Right. Dr. Barker was involved in
that only to the degree of teaching courses and
serving on committees. And who was responsible
for that one? Within the College of Engineering,
Dr. Chris Gronemann was the head of the department
at the time that that doctoral program was
started. And then Dr. Everett Glaesner kind of
came in and coordinated that program until Dr.
Gronemann retired, which was in 1967, which
actually made the faculty position available
that I filled at a lower level. Dr. Glaze may go on to
the head of the department. Now,
when we created the College of Education, prior to
that, there were four different departments in
three separate colleges. So then the old
Department of Education was divided into three
departments, being Educational Curriculum and
Instruction, Educational Psychology, and
Educational Administration.
It was quite a change when we pulled all teacher
education together. At the time we created the
College of Education, I remember Frank Hubert
introducing the faculty as the young faculty. And
remember that's 18 years ago. And many of us who
you're interviewing now, Glenn Johnson, Don
Barker, various ones of us were younger then than
we are now. But it was really a privileged be
associated with the development and evolution of
this new administrative unit, and the end of the
dynamic leadership of Frank Hubert. But as he
introduced this, and as he put together the
faculty for this college, we look at the type of
people that have been attracted to it, especially
in the earlier time of the, not to detract from
those now, but the earlier time when that's Glenn
Johnson coming from the Ohio City University
through
Columbia, with Bob Schutz coming out of Stanford,
with Hal Hawkins coming out of Harvard, with Jack
Campbell is already here, but he's coming out of
Columbia, coming to Teachers College of
Columbia.
What attracted all these people to A&M? Was it Dr.
Hubert's himself, or was it the opportunity to get
in on something that was just really new and
starting, or what do you think? Well, I guess Lynn
Johnson and I were here prior to the actual start of
the college, so it was
right at the time that Texas A&M, of course, was
changing tremendously, and that we'd learned
that there were such things as girls, and we were
expanding, of course, it was interesting, I came
here as a professor of college of engineering to
have very few girls in classes, but to talk to
people like Paul Hensarling, who was in the
Department of Education and realized that we had a
kindergarten endorsement at Texas A&M as one of
the first ones in the state, even though we were
traditionally an all-male institution,
However, this kindergarten endorsement was
primarily for summer school. What was an
endorsement? Was that like something that they
did? Well, rather than a degree of being
elementary education, your certification in
elementary is, but to teach kindergarten, it was
an endorsement on an existing certificate. And so
what we really had was a kindergarten endorsement
so people would have their elementary
certificates, and then they would get their
kindergarten endorsement from us. and many of
those were summer school courses. And those were
for girls that were coming in, or late, or women?
Okay. But it was interesting to be a traditionally
male institution, one of the first kindergarten
endorsements. I think, of course, that was before
there was a college to educate. Right. I don't know
if you picked up any place in your discussion,
Sylvie, about this man, Frank Hubert. Not enough.
I would be dealing with him later on. It was fun to
hear a person who many, many people think about as a
very... structured, very, well, the word cold has
been used to describe Frank Hubert, and I guess
those of us who knew him better would say he was a
very warm human individual. In trying to build
that a little bit, I'd like to share some personal
things that I learned about working with him.
First, Frank Hubert got his original
baccalaureate degree from the University of
Texas and went to Orange in political science, and
then went to Orange as band teacher. And when he was
in Orange, he tells a story about how he worked with
the Bingo Bells, and the Bingo Bells was a drum and
bugle corps in the mid-30s, which was kind of
before the day of the drum and bugle corps for
girls. But he really worked for Ledger Stark, who
was a lumberman in the area, a Stark family. And he
tells a story about performance-based teaching,
performance-based employment. I'll tell you a
story. song that Mr. Stark had heard over the
radio, and he called Frank Hubert up and said,
Frank, he said, I think we girls, he explained, he
said, I'd like the girls to play that next week.
Hubert called the radio station and found out that
the name of the song was, Hey, That's Boogie
Woogie. So this was right at the early Boogie
Woogie time. He ended up, Mr. Stark had told Hubert
that there was $100 in it for him if the girls had
that to play the following week. So he got the radio
station, found out where it was, finally got a hold
of a copy of the music, arranged it for all of the
ranks that they had in their music corps, and they
played it the following week. He said, now that's
performance based. But he tells us stories of
working with that group, taking them to Soldier's
Field in Chicago on a train that was air
conditioned back at that time, and how the girls
One girl had come from quite a lot of wealth in the
Golden Triangle there of Beaumont, Orange area,
where the other kids had come with brown paper
sacks for their luggage for that trip. Mr. Stark
saw that and said, that'll never happen again. So
after that, when they traveled, each girl had
their own piece of luggage with a companion
overnight bag with all of the things that would go
in it. And each of them traveled in white
coveralls. And to hear Frank Hubert share this
about wanting to meet the needs of economic
deprived as well as economic well, gave me an
insight into the man. Also, his dad was a medical
doctor, and as he talked about going to the homes of
people of lesser means and Frank talked about
going to the homes of people with his dad for the
delivery of children and so forth, and realizing
the diversity in our population, the ethnic
groups, and his dad was a doctor for all ethnic
groups. And at that time in Texas history, that
says something about the heritage of Frank. To
finish off the Orange story, he went to Orange as a
band teacher, then went back to Austin during the
summers worked on his masters and then stayed at
Orange as principal of the high school and went
into World War II and came out of World War II and
went to UT and got his doctorate and then worked at
the Texas Education Agency for a number of years
prior to going back to superintendent of schools
in Orange. So all of his public school career was in
Orange as first a teacher, then a principal, and
then as a superintendent. realizing that he
replaced J.W. Edgar when J.W. Edgar went to the
Texas Education Agency as Commissioner of
Education. That is when Frank Hubert went to
Orange as superintendent of schools. It was from
that background, sharing all of that background
with a man, he then came to Texas A&M University
when there were four administrative units.
For clarity, let's call them colleges, but
realize we were a Texas A&M college. But now, if we
take about Texas University, the equivalent of,
and he came as the Dean of Arts and Sciences. And you
need to get him to talk about the evolution of all of
this. I'm sharing a lot about him, but trying to
share some of his warmth. So under his leadership,
the College of Liberal Arts was divided into the
College of Arts and the College of Science, or
Liberal Arts and Science. And out of Liberal Arts
also came the College of Business
Administration. and now that also has been in the
College of Education. He deemed in the College of
Arts and Sciences, then in the College of Middle
Arts, and then in the College of Education. So to
deem in three separate colleges, but really he
helped spawn those, which during a time of growth,
he was a part of this growth here at Texas A&M
University. At the time he interviewed Jim Boone
and myself for positions of leadership in the new
college.
named Jim Boone, the head of the department in
industrial ed. He asked me if I would serve as the
then coordinator of research and development for
the college of education, which the following
year was then elevated to the associate dean for
research and development. But his comment to us
jokingly, but with sincerity, was, deans make
mistakes. But he held his finger up and waved and he
says, but they only have to live with them for one
year. But then a twinkle in his eye that said, you
know, I have faith in you, I have confidence in you,
but this is not a tenured administrative
position. And of course I was pleased to be able to
serve as his associate dean up until the time of his
retirement and then moving on forward into the
working in the same position under the current
dean. And also under Dean Lindbacher, that one.
Under the interim dean. Yes, under the interim
dean of Dean Lindbacher. And experiencing the
administrative style of each of these three, I
learned from each and gained professionally from
each. I guess the one that I wanted to almost put on
tape was to try to dispel any feelings that Frank
Hubert was that cold administrator who made
dictatorial decisions for the dean's office.
Knowing him as I did, I feel he had great insights
into the feeling for and of his faculty. He had a
pipeline into the faculty that many faculty
members did not. we're not aware of, I guess. It was
an informal one, but he had great insights into
their professional capabilities, their
professional needs, as well as their personal
needs and likes and dislikes. Do you think that
because it was a much smaller group at the time, it
was easier to do that than it would be, say, now when
the faculty has tripled probably, or I don't know
how much it has grown since he was here, but I'm
hearing from other people that communication is
okay, but it's strictly through the department
head that there's not a whole lot of communication
because it's just sometimes even within the one
floor you don't know, you're not as able. It can't
help, size can't help but impact on it. But there
are those who could administer very large units
and still have that feel for it. I think he had that
quality, that insightfulness that was needed to
do that. We didn't operate with a lot of formal
committees, but yet there were appropriate
committees, selected committees, and
involvement of faculty in them, not to the degree
that we have the committee structure in the
university today. We're operating with the
Faculty Senate today, which in the all of that
speaks to more committee structure. But he
operated with a... That's all overall college,
not just the College of Education. That's the way
it has to work now because of... In the total
university, it's more committee structure. I
see. But even within the College of Education, Our
inquiry groups have certainly added some
opportunities for faculty to feel a sense of
input. If they didn't feel it before, they have the
opportunity to feel that now. And perception is
important. Right. Now, maybe that's something
that I'm interested in finding out. Was the goal of
the mission, in your opinion, or the goal or
mission of the college, which is right now
teaching research and service, has it changed in
the proportion or in how much it is devoted to
teaching or research now. I'm trying to divide
this study into the Hubert era as such, because
that was the beginnings, and then the present era,
and then look into the future a little bit, maybe.
But to what extent is that mission, do you feel,
being fulfilled now versus how it was at the time?
Is the emphasis the same, I guess, is what I'm
wanting to know. The emphasis on teaching, I
think, is not... any different now than it was
then. I think we always must emphasize the
teaching role in a university, and then use the
research and service role as support to teaching.
I realize that some colleges might look at it the
other way around, but as a university, we have to
look at it. We do have a job of teaching, but then
teaching is enhanced with appropriate research
and service activities. And I think that the
emphasis on research is no different now than it
was then. There were more opportunities in my
particular field of industrial vocational
education. There were more opportunities for
research and service activities ten years ago
than there are now because of the funding level.
Which I want to come back and speak to the
development of the interdisciplinary education
program which I was deeply involved. And part of
that was the result. The reason that evolved as it
has is because of external funding. I think I would
see our college grew in the earlier time because of
external funding. We can name various faculty
members, or faculty member lines at least, and
even incumbents in those lines, that are here
today because of external funding that allowed us
to develop programs. And I don't see that
happening today as much as I did then. Let's just
tick them off a little bit. Community education
was certainly one of the programs that evolved
here because of major funding from the Mott
Foundation. Hal Hawkins was instrumental in
getting some of those funds. Bob Barrage was PMN as
Director of the Center for Community Education
and carried that role on for a number of years. But
it was through the funding from the Mott
Foundation that the line position for the Bob
Barrage Professor line was established in the
Education Administration. Well, that's a full
tenure track line that someone else now carries,
funded by the university. And then as the funds for
Mott Foundation diminished or were redirected,
that position for him was there. Taking other
positions similar to that, when we created the Dr.
Ponder, I believe him right now, he was the one who
came in on soft money the first year he was here in
health and physical education. He came in on There
was funds from Baylor College of Medicine with the
University of Houston to create a health
administration program. And we got funds from the
Kellogg Foundation to Baylor College of Medicine
back to the University of Houston, Texas
University. And it was through those funds that
created this faculty position. And when we
created it, we were in a growth situation, in a tax
situation here in Texas, where we could make these
commitments that we can't make. that we would,
over a period of three years, absorb that position
into the university budget. So as the program
generated student credit hours, then we were able
to build a faculty position with that. We can look
at, in the industrial vocational education
program, the position that Dr. Chris Borman
originally came on was a soft money position under
what we call the old EPDA, Professional Education
and Professional Development Act, Section 553
funds. These were, and they came through the
state. So we had state funds coming to Texas A&M to
assist in the development of a vocational
guidance program. So when Dr. Borman came, he came
as a professor, also wanting to help us develop a
program in vocational guidance. As his, the next
year that he became a full-time professor, a
budgeted line in the Department of Education and
Psychology, We retained that soft money for a
couple of years, and I guess probably if we look at
that position now, Jerry Capus is probably on that
line, but has gone through four or five different
people. But that original line item came as soft
money. Soft money always refers to? To contract
and grant activity. Okay. As we look at additional
funds, it was in the vocational education
division. We started our doctoral program in
vocational education. with 25 fully funded
doctoral fellows. I need to talk more about that
era. But that also created a couple line items for
people. We also created our adult education
program through soft money. And that created line
item. And then over time, evolved those into full
tenure track positions. So several of the
positions that are in the college now as tenure
track faculty members or tenure track lines are
ones that started through, quote, soft money. And
of course, I was in such a. I'd say almost an Indian
position, that I was back on it now, of being the one
that coordinated getting these dollars and
assisting these programs in their early
evolutionary stages. It was a very rewarding
period of time for me personally in doing this. I'm
glad Frank Hubert saw in me to assist in doing that.
Let me just talk about the adult ed program,
interdisciplinary education program a little
bit and see how it has evolved, because it's unique
in all university campuses. Put it in the context
of in 1969, when we created the College of
Education, we had these six academic departments
that we've already named. In February of 1970,
there was a man by the name of superintendent of
schools Dallas at the time. Sorry, I'm dropping
the name.
I'll have to pick that name back up. It came on our
campus and made a presentation to a group of
graduate students and faculty members that by
1980, this is 1970 now, they would anticipate
having more students enrolled in their adult and
continuing education programs than they did at
that time in their ongoing elementary and
secondary programs. Now you think about that,
that's a very horrible statement. So here I'd been
appointed as a Associate Dean for Research and
Development. I was just a coordinator at that
time. I asked myself a question, what are we doing
to prepare teachers to teach in that program? So
the first major proposal that exited the College
of Education after I was here was a proposal to
Texas Kidney Agency to develop an adult education
program. Now, so where within the structure I just
described to you of the six departments, would you
put an adult education program? It certainly is
education psychology. Adult psychology is
different than adolescent psychology, child
psychology. It's certainly curriculum, but it's
especially program administration. So we, and
there's some other place to put it. The only adult
education course we had on the books was on
agriculture education. About the same time,
there's a program called, and I've already
referenced it, the Education Professions
Development Act, the EPDA, had money in it for
development of graduate programs of vocational
education, comprehensive vocational
education. So we had the Department of
Agriculture Education and the Department of
Industrial Education. But vocational education
is certainly more than those two. So here we were to
develop an administrative leadership program
for vocational education. So where would we place
it in our administrative structure? So what we
did, we created a program called
interdisciplinary education. And in that
interdisciplinary education, we housed these
two programs. One was considered to be a holding
tank until they could do sprint off and do other
things. But the interdisciplinary really
evolved around where we got the faculty from. Here
I was the coordinator in addition to my deans,
subject deanship role, I was also a coordinator of
interdisciplinary education. And I would pull
faculty from each of the departments that needed,
I needed to teach a course. If I needed a course in
guidance, I'd go to Ed Psych and get the person. If I
had a course in administration, vocational
education, I'd go to industrial ed, I could go to ag
ed. We'd have, we'd go to EBCI while sitting and
teach someone. And we had all the flexibility to
pull. And one of the nice things about this, I don't
feel I ever got the leftovers of the faculty. I was
able to always pull in the The main faculty were to
teach that course. There was a good cooperative
arrangement. But there was a shortcoming. Who was
home to do the committee work?
The student advisors and so forth. So finally we
started putting some budget lines in that
program, interdisciplinary education, to have a
coordinator of adult education, a coordinator of
adult extension, and a coordinator of vocational
education. Then we started putting additional
monies in there. So today, as we know the
department now, it more or less operates as a
department, even though it officially doesn't
have departmental status. It's an institutional
education program. It's not approved by the
coordinating boards of the department. But for
all practical purposes, we operate as a
department, because it has its own inventory of
courses, its own category of faculty, its own
category of students.
The members of that faculty are represented on our
advisory committees in the college, on the policy
committee. all functions of all the unique it is
not a department so it's just and the other unique
thing about it though is that before we operate
around here on the subvention of money earned from
student credit hours generated if I in EDCI if Jack
Campbell earns student credit hours those are
credited back to EDCI if I earn credit hours in
industrial education, they're credited back to
our department, industrial education. However,
if I teach a course in interdisciplinary
education, like I teach my grads course, those
student credit hours are IDED. However, the
subvention for those is credited back to the home
department of where I have my academic
appointment. And that was something that, again,
was one that we evolved through in the creation of
this IDED program. Another one, while I'm talking
about the evolution of this adult education
program, I was having coffee one Sunday morning
with the then director of the Agriculture
Extension Service, and he was somewhat bemoaning
the fact that their extension personnel had a lot
of good technical skills, but very few people
skills. They had a degree in animal science, but
the first job they had was a 4-H director working
with two-legged people, two-legged animals. So I
shared that with Frank Hubert Monday morning
after I had gotten that from the director and we
said why don't we add the word extension to that
adult program. And so with a stroke of the pen we
changed the word from adult education to adult and
extension education. So our department, our
adult ed program is adult and extension
education, not by accident, but by planning that
in, by coming talking with people in agriculture
extension that wanted this people skills and then
having the dean allowing that to be put in and so now
that is in the college of education rather than the
college of agriculture and it was a John Hutchison
who was then say the director of agriculture
extension service and I evolved this plan and Don
Seaman's appointment in interdisciplinary
education when he came his appointment was and
really right up until almost last year was
part-time in Ag College Extension Service and one
of the secretaries in that program was funded by Ag
College Extension Service all these years
because we were wanting to prepare people to work
in the Extension Service as well as the adult
program. So that has been a link or a connection
with the Extension. Is there anything that I can
get where all of this is documented? because, of
course, I get it from the transcript, but is there
something, some document that this would all be
chronicled in? Right. I'm afraid that...